#GCP #PublicCloud 

The ability to dynamically scale infrastructure based on traffic and needs is another advantage of leveraging public cloud. When running infrastructure on-premises or in a private cloud, you’re fundamentally limited by the available physical space for the infrastructure and how much infrastructure you own. Not only is it tough to grow beyond the real-world, physical constraints but whenever you have infrastructure that’s not in use – either allocated for peak loads or future capacity – you’re paying for hardware to sit on a shelf.

IT teams building or managing infrastructure themselves have to spend a lot of time planning for and building out capacity that is very expensive to procure. These costs pile up as you look at real estate, physical security, warehousing, power, and cooling, and we haven’t even gotten to the licensing and hardware costs yet! From there, you need to procure servers and networking equipment, wire it all together, and install all of the relevant software, such as approved operating systems, applications, and security tooling such as antivirus and monitoring software. As you can imagine, this isn’t very flexible. If you have a capacity you don’t use, you still have to pay for any licensing and other associated costs that may come with that infrastructure.

Assuming you don’t have enough capacity, being able to scale up is an even bigger challenge. Being able to forecast hardware utilization, especially as teams are launching new applications or projects, can be challenging. If you have run out of physical space, it may take a few years to onboard a new data center with meaningful capacity. You must often plan months or even years ahead to map out the required hardware capacity to have it available for the team at the right time. Any major world event may impact your ability to deliver on that capacity. We saw this in 2020 and 2022, when supply chains were disrupted, and therefore so was the ability for hardware vendors to make their shipments on time.

Meanwhile, in public cloud, vendors have data centers all over the world, and with the click of a button or the call of an API, you can spin up a new region or request more capacity for a workload. This flexibility allows companies to only pay for the infrastructure that they use, which contrasts with the approach where they must pay for the infrastructure they think they may use 2 years from now. This allows for better cost of ownership and for the IT budget to match or at least correlate with how the business is doing overall. If the business is struggling and has fewer users, infrastructure can easily be scaled down to match the new reality. If there is suddenly a spike in usage that proves to be a longer-term trend, you can easily scale up to meet this demand.