#GCP #DigitalTransformation 

Data generated by an organization is a valuable resource that can be weaponized to gain a competitive advantage. Variables such as deal sizes, revenue by market, and growth are all inputs that can be taken into account when designing go-to-market strategies to better compete with the rest of the market.

Similarly, data that is collected from customers can be used to inform product development and strategy. By running rigorous client evaluations, organizations can collect client sentiment in real time and leverage that information to gain an advantage over competitors. This information can range from sentiment related to brand, technology, and what it’s like to work with employees from your company.

Organizations that can collect, analyze, and implement client feedback faster than others will have advantages in both client satisfaction and capability. A data-centric culture ensures that teams within your organization will not only respect client feedback but also respect the process of acting on client feedback. This will usually entail the implementation of client satisfaction measuring systems such as the Net Promoter Score, where the likelihood of a client referring the solution to someone else is measured rather than just raw satisfaction. In addition, there will need to be client feedback looks implemented, such as feature requests and development engagements.

In summary, developing and implementing a data-driven culture for an organization gives it many advantages over its competitors that do not follow suit. They’ll be able to make better-informed decisions by using reliable and up-to-date data that empowers them to be more productive and efficient and identify new opportunities. By identifying and making the most of these opportunities, they’ll be able to out-innovate their competition, building features and capabilities that provide meaningful value to clients and therefore generate expansion and net new opportunities.