#GCP #PublicCloud 

When scaling an application, there are many things to consider. How do we architect for a global audience? How do we make data accessible to global users without compromising security and regulatory standards? What tools and technologies are optimal for building global systems? Although this can be done via the traditional, on-premises approach, it would take years of planning and development. Meanwhile, with a public cloud provider, you can quickly define and execute a plan, given the abstraction of having to procure and manage the physical infrastructure.

The technology considerations, validation, and implementation can also often be much easier with a public cloud provider. They have existing relationships with vendors, offer their services via a marketplace, and can handle the procurement via their platform. This makes it much easier to get hands-on with technology as everything is one API call away and the vendors tend to build partnerships and integrations with independent software vendors.

Hyperscale cloud providers also offer a myriad of services, typically built on first-party or open source technologies, which provide their customers with a platform upon which to build. Developers and architects can quickly iterate on system design by testing benchmark performance and getting a meaningful understanding of cost. These services can also be autoscaling and fault-tolerant, allowing folks to build systems that scale up to the peak but also scale down during off-peak hours. This enables teams to pay for infrastructure that they use rather than paying for infrastructure, regardless of whether or not it’s needed.