#GCP  #DigitalTransformation 

Data-driven culture also has the benefit of helping organizations and their leadership teams identify new opportunities to better serve their customers. Once information is digital and easily available, teams across the organization can cross-reference different bodies of information to find patterns and outliers in the data. For example, an e-commerce firm may cross-reference weather data with marketing campaigns to launch a campaign for rain boots and umbrellas whenever it rains. A data platform company may provide analytics or advanced capabilities such as machine learning as a service to its clients.

Digitization opens up all kinds of new ways to monetize as organizations begin to rethink how they go to market, how they price and package their products, and who their customers are. As a gaming company, perhaps that’s identifying a new market where you are seeing outsized growth and doubling down on that market. As an advertiser, that may be identifying a campaign that is performing well within a specific audience and identifying other people who have similar interests to that audience and running the campaign against them as well. For a healthcare organization, it may mean carrying out patient population studies to identify who is at the highest risk for specific health conditions, such as type 2 diabetes within those populations, and launching preventative health programs.

Data gives us a new lens through which to look at a business and businesses that have a strong data culture, mature data systems, and practices will have an advantage over those that do not.