#GCP #PublicCloud 

Reliability is a key metric for applications, particularly when those systems need to be on 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and every week of the year. An example of an application that needs to be online at all times would be a consumer-facing banking application. It doesn’t matter if it’s 3 A.M. on a Tuesday or if you’re in Europe – you would expect the banking application for your American retail bank to be functional, accessible, and secure, regardless of where you access it from and the time of day. Perhaps you lost your plane ticket and needed to purchase a new one or you ran out of cash and needed to withdraw additional funds. The application being down may not only impact your ability to travel back home but also your ability to procure goods and services you require to live, such as shelter, water, and food. In a world where funds are digital, having the banking application unavailable for any period could be considered unacceptable.

When trying to understand how important reliability is for customers, it’s helpful to think about the impact of the application going offline. Depending on the circumstances, your application may have little to no usage outside of business hours or your office. In this circumstance, you may be able to weather a database being offline for several hours as teams patch or upgrade the underlying infrastructure, hardware, operating system, or application. However, for applications that are externally facing and need to serve global users for a business-critical workload – you need as much uptime as possible.

Some common terms around reliability are _four 9s_ or _five 9s_ of uptime. This refers to the percentage of time services were available over a certain period – typically a year. For example, if your application or service provides _four 9s_ of uptime, it would be available 99.99% of the time over a year, translating to about 52 minutes of downtime per year. An even higher bar for uptime is _five 9s_, where your application is available 99.999% of the time over a year – totaling only 6 minutes of downtime.

When working with public cloud, reliability is often one of the reasons cited as justification for the migration. Public cloud providers abstract away much of the physical complexity of managing uptime and ensuring infrastructure is consistently available to users. By leveraging hyperscale platforms, companies can build on top of services that can natively autoscale based on load, have redundancy built in, and are architected across multiple regions or zones. This would be achievable with private cloud but the costs would be enormous. Often, organizations such as banks will run multiple data centers that are essentially replicas of each other to be able to recover from and deal with issues related to major outages. With public cloud, in particular **Google Cloud**, it’s very easy to build multiregional infrastructure and architect network traffic failover with multi-regional datastores. This ensures that when a region does go down, your application can still funnel traffic to functional infrastructure and access the data it needs.